feat(ADR-44, ADR-49): signed fetch (#32)
decentraland/adr: docs/ADR-49-signed-fetch-v2.md

# Signed Fetch V2

This document describe an improved mechanism to communicate Users with Decentraland Services over HTTP messages. This mechanism support all previously use case and includes new security features and follow common and well proved standards:

## Summary

Preserved features include:

- The ability to generate signed request on front end application
- Sign request's method and pathname
- Sign metadata
- Support `decentraland-crypto` as signature generator

New features include:

- Sign `Host` and `Content-Type` headers and query to prevent request re-utilization between services and/or environments
- Sign arbitrary headers that Services can trust that were provide by Users
- Sign request's body to prevent manipulation between Users and Services
- Use `Authorization` header to take advantage of default behavior of caching for private content (see: [1](https://greenbytes.de/tech/webdav/rfc7234.html#rfc.section.3), [2](https://www.w3.org/Protocols/HTTP/Issues/cache-authentication.html))
- Support `multipart/form-data` requests
- Support `PersonalSign` as signature generator
- Self contain expiration

> > Although this new mechanism is not backward compatible it doesn't include any incompatibility which means tha a Service could accept request signed with either of the two mechanisms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Although this new mechanism is not backward compatible it doesn't include any incompatibility which means that a Service could accept request signed with either of the two mechanisms
```

## Sign a Request

In this mechanism the `Authorization` header is used to transport the signature of the request:

### Authorization

The [Authorization](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Authentication#authorization_and_proxy-authorization_headers) request headers contain the credentials to authenticate a User with a Service. Here, the `Type` is used to differentiate the format on which the `Credentials` is encode/encrypted.

```ts
  Authorization = Type + ' ' + Credentials
```

In mechanism `Type` is compose of 3 component:

```ts
  Type = SignAlgorithm + '+' + HashAlgorithm [ + '+' + SignEncoding ]
```

> - `SignAlgorithm`: Defines how user generate the signature of the request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SignAlgorithm`: Defines how user generates the signature of the request
```

>   - `DCL`: when the signature was generated using [`decentraland-crypto`](https://github.com/decentraland/decentraland-crypto)

Reviewer: Should we need to name it `DCLV1` then? based on the comment below @2fd @menduz

Author: Isn't necessary, but we can change it if we preferred

Reviewer: ok

  - `SIGN`: when the signature was generated using a [`eth_sign`](https://eth.wiki/json-rpc/API#eth_sign) call

> Note: Other methods can be added into this list, like `DCL2` for future versions of `decentraland-crypto` or the algorithm change and `TYPED4` if `signTypedData_v4` is use to generate the signature

> - `HashAlgorithm`: Defines the Hash Algorithm used to hash the request, since [some algorithms as not consider secure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Hash_Algorithms) any more, `SHA256` is support as minimum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `HashAlgorithm`: Defines the algorithm used to hash the request, since [some algorithms as not consider secure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Hash_Algorithms) any more, `SHA256` is support as minimum
```

  - `SHA256`: at the moment consider [secure against collision attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Hash_Algorithms) and with the most extended support

> Note: Other Hash methods can be added into this list, like `SHA512` and `SHA3-256`

- `SignEncoding`: An optional extra component that defines how Credentials are encoded

>   - `BASE64`: when Cretenilas should be decoded usgin [`Base64`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `BASE64`: If credentials should be decoded using [`Base64`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648)
```

>
>  'Authorization': 'DCL+SHA256+BASE64 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'
>
>  'Authorization': 'SIGN+SHA256 0x5b3cf13b6e21b41df56bbd5b8fb4ef6241306c666bb4136205a15ff74b698d5b10f2c1eab94306ae83d8b61350e19856cc6a610da135dd1b8601beac855e3d321b'
> ```

### CanonicalRequest

> To create a signature that includes information from your request an standardized (canonical) format is required. This ensures that when a Service receives the request, it can calculate the same signature that you calculated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a signature that includes information from your request a standardized (canonical) format is required. This ensures that when a Service receives the request, it calculates the same signature that you calculated.
```

```ts
  CanonicalRequest =
    HTTPRequestMethod + ' ' + CanonicalURI + CanonicalQueryString + '\n' +
    CanonicalHeaders + '\n' +
    BodyHashPayload
```

### 1. HTTPRequestMethod

> Required: always *MUST* be included

The [HTTP method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Methods) that will be use to send the request.

```ts
  HTTPRequestMethod = 'GET' | 'HEAD' | 'POST' | 'PUT' | 'DELETE' | 'CONNECT' | 'OPTIONS' | 'TRACE' | 'PATCH'
```

### 2. CanonicalURI

> > Required: always *MUST* be included

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Required: *MUST* be always included
```

```

> Note: In Javascript the URL API encodes the pathname using [RFC 3986](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986) as follow:
>
> ```ts
>   const url = new URL('https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ñ')
>   url.pathname === '/wiki/%C3%91'
> ```

### 3. CanonicalQueryString

> Required if: the request includes any query string

Normalized URI query string according with [RFC 3986](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986)

```ts
  CanonicalURI = '?order=asc' | '?q=%C3%B1'
```

> Note: In Javascript URL API and URLS encodes the query string using [RFC 3986](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986) as follow:
>
> ```ts
>   const url = new URL('https://www.google.com/search?q=ñ')
>   url.search === '?q=%C3%B1'
> ```
>
> ```ts
>   const params = new URLSearchParams('?q=ñ')
>   params.toString() === '?q=%C3%B1'
> ```

### 4. CanonicalHeaders

The canonical headers consist of a list of all the HTTP headers that you are including with the signed request.

```ts
  CanonicalHeaders =
    'host:' + Host + '\n' +
    ContentType + '\n' +
    'x-identity-expiration:' + Expiration + '\n' +
    'x-identity-metadata:' + Metadata + '\n' +
    ExtraHeaders
```

#### 4.1. Host

> > Required: always *MUST* be included

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Required: *MUST* be always included
```

Host encoded using [RFC 3492](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3492) and port number, if a non standard `http` or `https` port is used, of the server to which the request will be send.

```ts
  Host = 'decentraland.org' | 'xn--fiqs8s.asia' | 'localhost:8000'
```

#### 4.2 ContentType

> > Required if: the request includes some body content it *MUST* be prensent, otherwise it *MUST* be omitted

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Required if: the request includes some body content it *MUST* be present, otherwise it *MUST* be omitted
```

```ts
  Expiration = `2020-01-01T00:00:00Z`
```

#### 4.4 X-Identity-Metadata

> Required if: the request includes `X-Identity-Metadata` header

Extra metadata send to the server (encoded as [JSON](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4627))

```ts
  Metadata = `{"catalyst": "peer.decentraland.org"}`
```

#### 4.5. ExtraHeaders

> Optional

To sign other headers not listed previously Users can include them usign `X-Identity-Headers`, which is a list separated by semicolon. If this header all extra headers listed *MUST* be included in the sign as well in the same order they were listed

```ts
  ExtraHeaders = "x-identity-headers:" +
    LOWERCASE(SIGNED_HEADER_1) + ';' + LOWERCASE(SIGNED_HEADER_2) + ';' + LOWERCASE(SIGNED_HEADER_N) + '\n' +
    LOWERCASE(SIGNED_HEADER_1)  + ':' + TRIM(Headers[SIGNED_HEADER_1]) + '\n' +
    LOWERCASE(SIGNED_HEADER_2)  + ':' + TRIM(Headers[SIGNED_HEADER_2]) + '\n' +
    LOWERCASE(SIGNED_HEADER_N)  + ':' + TRIM(Headers[SIGNED_HEADER_N])
```

> Example: sign `Accept` and `Cookie` headers
>
> ```ts
>   ExtraHeaders = 'x-identity-headers:accept;cookie\n' +
>     'accept:application/json\n' +
>     'cookie:lang=en'
> ```

### 5. BodyHashPayload

> > Required if: the request includes some body content it *MUST* be prensent, otherwise it *MUST* be omitted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Required if: the request includes some body content it *MUST* be present, otherwise it *MUST* be omitted
```

> For almost every cases this is the result of hashing the content of the body, but for [`multipart/form-data` request](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Type#content-type_in_html_forms) a different approach is needed in order to be used on web applications

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For almost every case this is the result of hashing the content of the body, but for [`multipart/form-data` request](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Type#content-type_in_html_forms) a different approach is needed in order to be used on web applications
```

> For almost all cases this is the result hasing the content of the body, but for [`multipart/form-data` request](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Type#content-type_in_html_forms) a different approach is needed in order to be used on web applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For almost every cases this is the result of hashing the content of the body, but for [`multipart/form-data` request](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Type#content-type_in_html_forms) a different approach is needed in order to be used on web applications
```

When `ContentType != 'multipart/form-data'`

### 5.1 ContentType != multipart/form-data

Just hash the entire body

```ts
  BodyHashPayload = SHA265(REQUEST_BODY)
```

### 5.2 ContentType == multipart/form-data

The ordered list of all fields in the request, each field *MUST* be normalized as well

```ts
  BodyHashPayload = SORT(CanonicalField1, CanonicalField2 /*, ... */)
```

Each field *MUST* include `name` and `size` directives as prefix of the content hash

```ts
  CanonicalFieldX = 'name="description";' +
    'size=50;' +
    SHA256(FieldContent)
```

> Aditionaly if the some file are files *MUST* also include `filename` and `type` directives

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally if some fields are files they *MUST* also include `filename` and `type` directives
```

```ts
  CanonicalFieldX = 'name="description";' +
    'filename="image.png";' +
    'type="image/png";' +
    'size=99999999999;' +
    SHA256(FieldContent)

```

### Canonical Request Examples

#### `GET https://decentraland.org/api/status`

```txt
GET /api/status\n
host:decentraland.org\n
x-identity-expiration:2020-01-01T00:00:00Z
```

#### `GET https://decentraland.org/api/status` with metadata

```txt
GET /api/status
host:decentraland.org\n
x-identity-expiration:2020-01-01T00:00:00Z
x-identity-metadata:{"service":"market.decentraland.org"}
```

#### `POST https://decentraland.org/api/status?filter=asc` with metadata

```txt
POST /api/status?filter=asc\n
host:decentraland.org\n

> x-identity-expiration:2020-01-01T00:00:00Z

Reviewer 3: tailin \n is not consistent here, should \n be explicit in this representation? we already have new lines between lines

Author: it is just a visual help

Author: we can delete if it seems confusing

Reviewer 3: yes please remove it if it is only a clue
